Data Analysis / Science Interview Questions
================

### Statistics and Probability

1.  What is **sensitivity and specificity**?
    
      - ie. “Predict the presence of a disease”, then **sensitivity** is
        the true positive rate
      - ie. % of people who don’t have the disease who received a
        negative prediction is called **specificity**

2.  **Type I and Type II error**?
    
      - A type I error: H0 is true but is rejected.
      - A type II error: H0 is false but **isn’t** rejected.

3.  Linear Regression

<!-- end list -->

  - There is a linear relationship between the dependent variable (Y)
    and the independent variable (X).

  - Homoscedasticity: a condition in which the variance of the
    residuals, or error term, in a regression model is *constant*. That
    is, the error term does not vary much as the value of the predictor
    variable changes

  - The independent variables aren’t highly correlated with each other
    (multicollinearity); aka they are not a linear transformation of the
    other.

  - The residuals follow a normal distribution and are independent of
    each other.
    (iid)

### Error metrics:

    - MSE: The mean squared error measures the average squared difference between true and predicted values across all data points. 
    
    - RMSE: The RMSE (root mean squared error) takes the square root of the mean squared error.
    
    - MAE: The mean absolute error takes the average absolute difference between the true and predicted values across all data points.

4.  What is **multicollinearity**?

Multicollinearity occurs when two or more independent variables in the
dataset are highly correlated with each other. In a regression model,
multicollinearity can harm the interpretability of the model because it
will be difficult to distinguish the individual effects of each variable
on the model. -\> Inflate the R2

5.  **R-squared**?

The value of R-squared tells us the amount of change in the dependent
variable (Y) that is explained by the independent variable (X). The
R-squared value can range from 0 to 1.

6.  Missing data?
    
      - Deleting missing values
      - Imputing missing values with the mean/median/mode
      - Building a machine learning model to predict the missing value
        based on other values in the dataset (KNN imputation method)
      - Replacing missing values with a constant

7.  Confounding variables

A confounding variable is a factor that affects both the dependent and
independent variables, making it seem like there is a causal
relationship between them.

For example, there is a high correlation between ice cream purchases and
forest fires. The number of forest fires and ice cream sales increases
at the same time. This is because the confounding variable between them
is heat. As temperature rises, so does ice cream sales and the risk of
forest fires.

8.  **Confidence interval**

A confidence interval is a probability that the true population
parameter falls between a range of two estimates

8.  **Confidence level**

The level of confidence (for example, 95% or 99%) refers to the
certainty that the true parameter lies within the confidence interval as
multiple samples are repeatedly taken.

9.  **correlation coefficient**

A correlation coefficient is an indicator of how strong the relationship
between two variables is. A coefficient near +1 indicates a strong
positive correlation, a coefficient of 0 indicates no correlation, and a
coefficient near -1 indicates a strong negative correlation.

 

  - What is A/B Testing?

A/B testing is the statistical hypothesis testing for a randomized
experiment with two variables A and B. Also known as the split testing,
it is an analytical method that estimates population parameters based on
sample statistics. This test compares two web pages by showing two
variants A and B, to a similar number of visitors, and the variant which
gives better conversion rate wins.

The goal of A/B Testing is to identify if there are any changes to the
web page. For example, if you have a banner ad on which you have spent
an ample amount of money. Then, you can find out the return of
investment i.e. the click rate through the banner ad.

  - What is a p-value?

  - Alternative Hypothesis vs NULL?

To explain the Alternative Hypothesis, you can first explain what the
null hypothesis is. Null Hypothesis is a statistical phenomenon that is
used to test for possible rejection under the assumption that result of
chance would be true.

After this, you can say that the alternative hypothesis is again a
statistical phenomenon which is contrary to the Null Hypothesis.
Usually, it is considered that the observations are a result of an
effect with some chance of variation.

  - What is the difference between 1-Sample T-test, and 2-Sample T-test?
    
      - T-Tests are a type of hypothesis tests, by which you can compare
        means. Each test that you perform on your sample data, brings
        down your sample data to a single value i.e. T-value. Refer
        below for the formula.
    
      - To calculate, 2-Sample Test, you need to find out the ratio
        between the difference of the two samples to the null
        hypothesis. So, if I have to summarize for you, the 1-Sample
        T-test determines how a sample set holds against a mean, while
        the 2-Sample T-test determines if the mean between 2 sample sets
        is really significant for the entire population or purely by
        chance.

  - What is the difference between 1-Sample T-test, and 2-Sample T-test?
    
      - T-test: T-test is used when the standard deviation is unknown
        and the sample size is comparatively small.
      - Chi-Square Test for Independence: These tests are used to find
        out the significance of the association between categorical
        variables in the population sample.
      - Analysis of Variance (ANOVA): This kind of hypothesis testing is
        used to analyze differences between the means in various groups.
        This test is often used similarly to a T-test but, is used for
        more than two groups.
      - Welch’s T-test: This test is used to find out the test for
        equality of means between two population samples.
