ORDER BY in Window Functions
================

## ORDER BY

  - `ORDER BY` is a subclause of `OVER`
  - It orders the rows related to the current row that the window
    function will use.

<!-- end list -->

``` sql
SELECT
  Year,
  -- Assign the lowest numbers to the most recent years
  ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY Year DESC) AS Row_N
FROM (
  SELECT DISTINCT Year
  FROM Summer_Medals
) AS Years
ORDER BY Year;
```

## Reigning champion

  - One of the applications of window functions is determining reigning
    champion status. A reigning champion is a champion who’s **won both
    the previous and current years’ competitions**. To determine if a
    champion is a reigning champion, the previous and the current years’
    champions need to be in the same row, in two different columns, so
    that they can be compared. How can you get a previous row’s value
    without complex self-joins?

  - Enter `LAG`. `LAG` is a window function that takes a column and a
    number n and returns the column’s value n rows before the current
    row. Passing 1 as n returns the previous row’s value.

### CTE (Common Table Expressions)

  - `WITH` provides a way to write auxiliary statements for use in a
    larger query. These statements, which are often referred to as
    Common Table Expressions or **CTEs**, can be thought of as defining
    temporary tables that exist just for one query. (**JUST FOR ONE\!**)

  - Having wrapped the previous query in the `Athlete_Medals` `CTE`,
    rank each athlete by the number of medals they’ve earned.

<!-- end list -->

``` sql
WITH Athlete_Medals AS (
  SELECT
    -- Count the number of medals each athlete has earned
    Athlete,
    COUNT(*) AS Medals
  FROM Summer_Medals
  GROUP BY Athlete)

SELECT
  -- Number each athlete by how many medals they've earned
  Athlete,
  ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY Medals DESC) AS Row_N
FROM Athlete_Medals
ORDER BY Medals DESC;
```

  - \*\*Difference between `WITH` and `TEMP TABLE`\*

  - \-\> Mostly a **memory** problem\! \<3

  - The main difference is that the temporary table is a stored table. A
    CTE is more akin to a *view*, and helps you express your SQL in an
    easier to read, more logical way. The same differences apply between
    tables and views in that a table gives you the potential to do
    things in a performant way.

  - While `TEMP` table is **transient** only for the current session,
    `WITH` is always re-evaluated.

### Reigning weightlifting champions

  - A reigning champion is a champion who’s won both the previous and
    current years’ competitions. To determine if a champion is reigning,
    the previous and current years’ results need to be in the same row,
    in two different columns.

  - Return each year’s gold medalists in the Men’s 69KG weightlifting
    competition.

<!-- end list -->

``` sql
SELECT
 -- Return each year's champions' countries
 Year,
 Country AS champion
FROM Summer_Medals
WHERE
 Discipline = 'Weightlifting' AND
 Event = '69KG' AND
 Gender = 'Men' AND
 Medal = 'Gold';
```

  - Having wrapped the previous query in the Weightlifting\_Gold
    **CTE**, get the previous year’s champion for each year.

### `LAG`

  - LAG is a window function that takes a column and a number n and
    returns the column’s value n rows **before** the current row.
    Passing 1 as n returns the previous row’s value.

<!-- end list -->

``` sql

-- This is basically like using a 
-- temporary table - with memory problems:

WITH Weightlifting_Gold AS (
  SELECT
    -- Return each year's champions' countries
    Year,
    Country AS champion
  FROM Summer_Medals
  WHERE
    Discipline = 'Weightlifting' AND
    Event = '69KG' AND
    Gender = 'Men' AND
    Medal = 'Gold')

SELECT
  Year, Champion,
  -- Fetch the previous year's champion
  LAG(Champion) OVER
    (ORDER BY Year ASC) AS Last_Champion
FROM Weightlifting_Gold
ORDER BY Year ASC;
```

### `PARTITION BY`

  - This OVER subclause splits the table into partitions based on a
    column’s unique values, similar to GROUP BY. Unlike GROUP BY,
    however, the results of a window function with PARTITION BY aren’t
    rolled into one column. Partitions are operated on separately by the
    window function. For example, ROW\_NUMBER will reset to 1 for each
    partition’s first row, and LAG will only fetch a row’s previous
    value if its previous row is in the same partition.

  - Adding PARTITION BY Event in the OVER clause before ORDER will
    separate the table into two partitions, one for Discus Throw and one
    for Triple Jump, the two unique values in the Event column. The one
    difference in the results is that the first row of the Triple Jump
    champions correctly has null as Last Champion. That’s because it’s
    the first row in its partition.

##### Exercise 1

  - Return the previous champions of each year’s event by gender.

  - Use `LAG`, partitioning by the gender column and ordering by year in
    ascending order.

<!-- end list -->

``` sql
WITH Tennis_Gold AS (
  SELECT DISTINCT
    Gender, Year, Country
  FROM Summer_Medals
  WHERE
    Year >= 2000 AND
    Event = 'Javelin Throw' AND
    Medal = 'Gold')
SELECT
  Gender, Year,
  Country AS Champion,
  -- Fetch the previous year's champion by gender
  LAG(Country)
   OVER (PARTITION BY Gender
                         ORDER BY Year ASC) AS Last_Champion
FROM Tennis_Gold
ORDER BY Gender ASC, Year ASC;
```

##### Exercise 2 - Reigning champions by gender and event
